[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Find a comfortable seat.
Allow your eyes to fall shut.
Allow your awareness to rest
on the flow of your breath.
Moving your awareness up
to the crown of the head.
Then again up above
the crown of the head.
Up into the sky and
above up into space.
Up into the ethers into Akash.
Begin to allow the
energy of the sun
and the moon, of all the
planets, of space and air
to draw down into the body.
Move down then to the
base of the spine.
Then dropping down
into the earth,
Imagine or see or visualize
roots growing down into Bhumi,
into the earth.
And then drawing up
the element of earth,
grounding and stabilizing.
Just enough fire to allow
the flames to grow bright
and water, jala,
to allow for flow.
Feel all these elements,
these five great elements
of space and air, of
fire and earth and water
in perfect balance in your body.
And take a long, deep breath.
And then gently open the eyes.
We'll be using our hands to
make sacred ritual shapes, which
promote balance and healing
throughout the body.
So take your fingers,
intertwine them, and just
lightly roll your wrists.
And then offer your fingers out
and gently pull on the fingers.
Our hands and wrists often
contain a lot of tension
from typing,
writing, and driving.
Then here, rotate the palms up.
Take the thumbs and
touch them over the ends
of the pinky finger
and the fourth finger.
This is Prana Mudra.
It draws a healing flow
of prana, of life energy,
into the body.
Taking this mudra, again,
allow the eyes to fall shut.
As you inhale, imagine or see or
visualize a warm, golden light
moving into the body.
As you pause at the
top of the inhalation,
allow that light to expand.
Exhaling out,
release any stress,
anxiety, disease, anything
that's not serving you.
Inhaling, drawing in
a warm, golden light.
Pausing and
expanding that light.
Allowing it to reach into
every cell in the body.
Exhaling, releasing.
One more breath,
inhaling deeply.
Drawing this light, this life
force energy, into the blood,
into the blood cells, into the
blood plasma, into the muscles,
into the fat tissues, into
our hormones, into our bones,
into our bone marrow,
into our vital essence.
Gently release the finger.
Stretch them out
and open the eyes.
Then coming into Vayu Mudra.
This mudra is very useful
for taming anxiety,
for taming what we call
the energy of vata dosha,
or the elements of air
and ether in the body.
We'll take the thumb, and we'll
fold it over the index finger,
folding it down.
This mudra is very calming,
very soothing, very grounding.
I like to rotate the palms down
and place them onto my knees.
Allow the eyes to fall shut.
Feeling yourself
grounded and stable.
And feeling the winds in
the body the breath as it
moves in and out.
Feeling the spaces of the body.
And the joints, the inside
of the skull cavity.
And then releasing this mudra,
gently opening the eyes,
stretching out the fingers
again, closing the fingers
and opening them.
Just working with mudra,
working with each fingertip,
we begin to see a great
deal of flow and healing
throughout the body.
You can take the wrists
and gently turn them.
You always want the mudra
to feel comfortable.
Coming into Matangi
Mudra for the fires
in the body, our willpower,
our strength, our courage.
And take the middle fingers.
Place them together.
The other fingers
intertwine, and then
I wrap my thumbs all the
way to my index fingers.
And then I'll place this
powerful mudra at my navel.
Allowing the eyes
to fall shut again,
invoking our inner fires, that
which illuminates the spark
of passion at the heart.
The fire of digestion,
the flame of sight,
our inspiration and our courage.
Feeling your inner flames
grow perfectly bright
or perfectly vibrant.
Feeling your inner courage,
your discipline, your willpower,
your ability to take action.
Then releasing this mudra,
again rolling the wrists.
I like to make fists
with the wrists
and roll them back
and forth and around.
And these mudras are so
wonderful and healing.
Anyone can do them.
If you're in a wheelchair,
you can perhaps
practice these mudras and get
a healing flow that connects
throughout the entire body.
The next mudra is for
the water element.
Kilaka Mudra.
We'll take the pinky fingers,
which access the water element
in the body, and we'll touch the
peace sign fingers, the index
and middle fingers,
to the thumbs.
And the fourth
fingers just float.
And we'll take this mudra,
which promotes a healing flow
of waters throughout the body.
Place it at the heart or below.
Allow the eyes to
fall shut again.
Imagine or see or
visualize a beautiful lake.
See the gentle ripples
on the water of the lake.
Allow the mind to
float on the surface
of this beautiful lake that
reflects a perfect blue sky.
Feel all the waters of the body.
And the kidneys,
the urinary bladder,
the inside of the mouth,
the lining of the stomach.
All in perfect balance,
in perfect flow,
in perfect harmony.
And releasing this mudra,
coming into one final mudra
for the earth element,
Bhumisparsha Mudra.
This is the mudra that it
said that the Buddha took
upon his awakening.
The left hand palm
up in the lap.
The right hand four fingers
gently touching the earth.
Touching into the earth,
the earth as the witness
to our unfolding and
our own awakening.
Allow the eyes to
fall shut again.
Allow your fingertips
to rest onto the earth.
And feel yourself grounded,
stable, steady, connected,
and rooted.
Allowing the earth
to absorb anything
that you are ready to release.
Feeling the column of the
spine emerging up and out
of the earth.
Feeling the polarity of
the base of the spine
and the crown of the head.
And then releasing this
mudra, bring the hands
to Anjali at your heart
center, bringing together
the right and left halves, the
sun and the moon, the negative
and the positive,
the hot and the cold,
dissolving all dualities,
merging into one.
Namaste.
[MUSIC PLAYING]